allemande:Two dancers take left / right hands and walk around one another 1.5 rotations, pulling slightly on one another's arms to facilitate the turn. The grip is not the one we use to shake hands, but is a grip with the thumb pointing upward, with which it is possible to exert tension more effectively. 'Once around' means that the dancers walk completely around one another and back to where they started. Fractional turns are measured in relation to this.

balance:The balance has many variations, but the most common one is a move performed by stepping on the left foot and kicking up the right (or vice versa), and then stepping on the right foot and kicking up the left (or vice versa), in a four count sequence. \nThe balance is found in three settings in contra dance: \n\ttwo dancers may take one hand or both and balance facing one another, usually preceding a swing; \n\tfour dancers may take hands in a circle and balance together;\n\tfour dancers may take hands in a wavy line (adjacent dancers facing opposite ways) and balance together.

box_the_gnat:This is a figure borrowed from western square dance, and is a means by which two dancers change places. The two dancers face one another and take right hands; the raven turns and backs under the lark's right arm while the lark crosses to the raven’s original place, turning to face back towards their original place; the dancers end the move each occupying the original place of the other.

cali_twirl:This figure is similar to "box the gnat" in that two dancers use it to change places. But it is different in that the dancers begin and end the move standing side by side instead of facing one another, and the lark takes the raven's left hand with their right. The raven walks under the arch made by their joined hands, while the lark walks around to the right to change places, with the end result that the dancers are still side by side, but facing the opposite way.

circle:Four dancers take hands in a circle and walk to the left (/right) one full rotation and back to place. Fractional circles involve rotating more or less than one full round, most commonly seen as 3⁄4 circles, often used in Becket formation dances.

courtesy_turn:The courtesy turn is a way in which a couple turns around halfway, usually following a half raven’s chain or a half right and left through. The lark takes the raven's left hand in his own left hand and places his right arm around the raven's waist, taking right hands at the right side of their waist. In this position the couple turns together one hundred and eighty degrees. Today's contra dancers often dispense with the courtesy turn and move to the next position with a twirl instead.

do_si_do:The basic do-si-do figure is executed by two dancers who pass right shoulders with one another, pass back to back, and back up passing left shoulders and returning to place. A mirror dosido is one in which the dancers on one side of the set begin the dosido passing right shoulders, and the dancers on the other side of the set begin the dosido passing left shoulders. Many of today's contra dancers like to twirl themselves around as they do the dosido.

eye_turn:The eye turn, previously known as gypsy is a figure borrowed from English country dancing somewhere between a do-si-do and a swing.  A pair of dancers look each other in the eyes and walk around each other by the shoulder without touching. The amount of eye contact depends on various factors including individual comfort and local tradition.

half_hey:Four dancers weave around one another without touching. Two dancers begin the figure by passing right shoulders, and the dancers continue to pass right shoulders in the center of the set and left shoulders at the sides until they have crossed the set.

full_hey:Four dancers weave around one another without touching. Two dancers begin the figure by passing right shoulders, and the dancers continue to pass right shoulders in the center of the set and left shoulders at the sides until they have returned to their original places.

chain: The two ravens take right hands and cross the set, where they are turned with a courtesy turn by the lark on the opposite side. The ravens then take right hands again and cross back to place, where they are once again turned, this time by the lark on their original side. Many of today's dancers like to use twirls in place of courtesy turns and there are newly composed dances that include chains for larks instead of ravens.

long_lines:Dancers take hands along the sides of the sets, and the two long lines walk four steps toward each other, and then four steps backwards to place.

mad_robin:Two dancers move around one another as in a do-si-do, but instead of beginning by facing one another, both dancers face in the same direction, often tracking eyes with the couple across the set.

pass_through:This figure is performed by two couples who pass by one another as they walk in opposite directions, either up and down or across the set. Even though the dancers may be in side-by-side couples, they act as individuals when passing through.

petronella:Four dancers, equally spaced around a small ring, move twice into the position of the dancer on their right in four steps while rotating (spinning) individually clockwise 3⁄4. This movement is adapted from the eponymous dance "Petronella," a traditional contra dance derived from a Scottish country dance of the same name. Some dancers clap twice on beats 3.5 and 4 of the 4-beat movement.

promenade: The two couples in the minor set walk across the set in promenade position passing one another, and then turn into the place vacated by the other couple. The promenade hold varies regionally.\n\tCourtesy turn position - (see Courtesy Turn above).\n\tSkater's promenade - as in the courtesy turn, the couple join left hands in front; rather than joining right hands behind the lady's back, right hands are joined in front above the left hands. In an uncommon variation, right hands are joined below left hands.\n\tVarsouvienne(cape) position- In this position, the gent is slightly behind the lady, with their joined left hands in front of her left shoulder, and their joined right hands above her right shoulder.

pull_by: Two dancers take hands and pull by one another going opposite directions. This figure may use the right hand or the left hand depending on its context, and it may occur along the set or across the set

right_left_through: Two dancers on one side of the set change places with two dancers on the other side of the set by pulling by the right across the set and doing a courtesy turn; then, in like manner, each of the dancers pull by across again and return home to another courtesy turn. The "right and left through" is often done only halfway, without the return.

star: The star left/right is performed by four dancers, who place their left/right hands together in the center of their little circle and walk forward around in a circle. The hand hold used will vary regionally, the most common holds being the handshake hold with the person opposite in the star, and the wrist hold in which every dancer takes the wrist of the dancer ahead. To star once around brings one back to where one started.

swing: The swing is performed by two dancers, who most commonly hold one another in ballroom position (the raven's left hand behind the lark's upper right arm, and the lark’s right hand on the raven’s lower back, their other hands joined), and turn clockwise together. Dancers lean back slightly as they swing, ‘giving weight’. A walking step may be used with the swing, but the buzz step is more popular in modern contra dance. The buzz step is a scooting motion in which the dancers' right feet stay close to their center of gravity, while their left feet paddle out around in a tight circle. 